MSC4293: Redact on kick/ban (#4293)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/4293-redact-on-ban.md

This redaction behaviour continues until the membership event itself is redacted (thus removing the
field) or another membership event removes the field. For example, if the user is unbanned, the moderator
MAY NOT choose to carry the `redact_events` flag to that kick (unban) event. Or, when the user rejoins
after a kick, the flag is implicitly dropped.

Other membership states with the flag no-op, such as joins.

Moderation bots and similar MAY still wish to issue (mass) redactions upon kick/ban to protect users
on servers or clients which don't have this feature.

Example ban:

```jsonc
{
  // Irrelevant fields excluded
  "type": "m.room.member",
  "state_key": "@spam:example.org",
  "sender": "@mod:example.org",
  "content": {
    "membership": "ban",
    "reason": "flooding", // this is copied to `redacted_because`, leading to clients showing it
    "redact_events": true
  }
}
```

The new field is proxied through to the event by the [`/kick`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3roomsroomidkick)
and [`/ban`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3roomsroomidban)
sugar APIs, like `reason` is.

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer: So just to be clear by the server do we mean that the sender of the ban also used to send redactions or is that just intentionally ambiguous because it is one of many possible options?

> ## Potential issues

Author: The server which receives (and soft fails) the event would apply redaction locally. No actual redaction events are sent out by this MSC - they're all locally applied.

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer: ah nice one

It's a little annoying that the flag is redacted when the membership event is redacted, however it's
extremely rare for a moderator/admin to redact a kick or ban event. We can fix this in a room version

> trivially if it proves to be an issue.

Reviewer: In consideration with:

>  or another membership event removes the field.

There could be an issue when joining a room with a long history with participating servers that do not implement this MSC. And the newly joining server backfills from one of the servers that has unredacted events sent by a user that has since rejoined/or their ban event was redacted. It is a rare circumstance but it's worth thinking about a little to see if there are any other implications. Dealing with old servers that do not implement the MSC is going to be an issue for sure, but hopefully that won't cause too many problems.

Clients may miss the membership event if they are using lazy loading, though servers should already
be tracking which membership events the client has received and needs to render events in the timeline.
This should mean that those clients will still receive the event.

Servers which miss the event will eventually receive or retrieve it, just like they would with any
other event.

## Alternatives

Mass redactions are the cited major alternative, where a single event can target approximately 1500
other events in the room. New rooms can benefit from that functionality, especially for cases not
covered by this proposal, while existing rooms can be given an option to protect their users with
relative ease.

> ## Security considerations

Author: We still need to make sure that the sender can actually do redactions in the room

# MSC4293: Redact on ban

[MSC2244 (accepted)](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/main/proposals/2244-mass-redactions.md)-style
mass redactions are incredibly helpful for cleaning up large volumes of spam, but still require sending
a dedicated event to clean up the spam. In a typical case, a user will get kicked/banned from a room
and the moderators will further redact some or all of their messages. Mass redactions have more use
cases, but the specific case of "redact everything upon ban" is something which may be easily backported
to existing room versions.

This proposal suggests adding a new flag to membership events to indicate to clients and servers that
all of that user's events should be redacted in addition to being kicked or banned. The flag isn't
protected from redaction itself, so may have some consistency issues, but overall should still provide
relatively high amounts of protection to rooms.

> This proposal is exploratory and subject to change. Implementations may validate the idea through
> early feature support, but MUST expect that things will change (or become completely rejected).
> 

Author: for when the MSC is ready for FCP:

```suggestion
```

events, the redaction doesn't apply. This means having a power level higher than or equal to `redacts`
*and* `events["m.room.redaction"]` (if set). Normally, `m.room.redaction` events could be rejected
due to the power levels - that rejection behaviour doesn't apply with the `redact_events` field.
Instead, the target's events are simply not redacted.

If the sender is allowed to redact, the redaction behaviour continues until the membership event itself
is redacted (thus removing the field) or another membership event removes the field. For example, if
the user is unbanned, the moderator MAY NOT choose to carry the `redact_events` flag to that kick
(unban) event. Or, when the user rejoins after a kick, the flag is implicitly dropped.

Events which are delivered after the ban are likely [soft failed](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/server-server-api/#soft-failure)
and are still redacted if the current membership event in the room has a valid `redact_events`
field.

Other membership states with the flag no-op, such as joins, knocks, and invites.

Moderation bots and similar MAY still wish to issue (mass) redactions upon kick/ban to protect users

> on servers or clients which don't have this feature.

Reviewer: It would be nice to have servers do this automatically so that bots don't have to paginate `/messages` and call `/redact` especially since this can trigger the homeserver to backfill and take a very long time.

Example ban:

```jsonc
{
  // Irrelevant fields excluded
  "type": "m.room.member",
  "state_key": "@spam:example.org",
  "sender": "@mod:example.org",
  "content": {
    "membership": "ban",
    "reason": "flooding", // this is copied to `redacted_because`, leading to clients showing it
    "redact_events": true
  }
}
```

The new field is proxied through to the event by the [`/kick`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3roomsroomidkick)
and [`/ban`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3roomsroomidban)
sugar APIs, like `reason` is.

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer: Moderation tooling that naively adds the flag to ban events can make itself think it has already sent real redactions for events when going over `/messages` pagination

Author: This sounds like a software bug in that tooling rather than the MSC?

Author: where possible, yes. For a bug like this though, unit/integration tests should catch it rather than any function the MSC can provide.

Did this kind of bug happen somewhere? If so, it'd be good to have a link so I can see if there's something that can be done to avoid it.

Author: Can the bot inspect the `redacted_because` field to determine *why* it was redacted?

Reviewer: Yes, that would be a way of solving this issue. I was unaware that `redacted_because` includes the entire event and assumed that it only included the reason. My bad.

Author: Alright, I'll add advice similar to that to the MSC. Thanks!

sugar APIs, like `reason` is.

## Fallback behaviour

Servers which don't support this feature may be served redacted events over federation when attempting
to fill gaps or backfill. This is considered expected behaviour.

Clients which don't support this feature may see events remain unredacted until they clear their local
cache. Upon clearing or invalidating their cache, they will either receive redacted events if their
server supports the feature or unredacted events otherwise.

To (primarily) help protect users on unsupported *clients*, implementations SHOULD continue to try
sending individual redaction events in addition to the redact-on-ban flag. They MAY cease to do so
once they are comfortable with the level of adoption for this proposal. Servers in particular SHOULD
assist clients and send individual redaction events on their behalf, meaning clients SHOULD wait a
little bit before trying to issue redactions themselves. For example, a client may ban a user, wait
a minute, then start sending redactions if it hasn't seen an `m.room.redaction` event targeting some
of the banned user's events. Servers MAY deduplicate redactions to lower federation load, as they

> always could.

Reviewer: Would it be possible to add a flag to client capabilities if the server has implemented the behavior to redact on the client's behalf?

The idea of the client needing to implement a watchdog and enabling one after each ban before issuing redactions in a time sensitive context (CSAM + pings) is problematic. I also worry that this will be quite a brittle thing to implement in the context of Matrix sync and complicated if it wants to avoid a resource leak.

Author: Discussed elsewhere, I'd like to avoid a capability because it's expected that client adoption in particular will be relatively quick. Capabilities are long-term things which can imply to clients/servers that the functionality is optional when our intention is only to make it optional to *send* (ie: via bots), but not *receive*. 

Clients/bots can additionally just send duplicate redactions without a timer. This solution may be preferred by bots which expect to drop the legacy redaction behaviour in relatively short time.

Those bots may still have to hit `/messages`, causing other problems, but the hope is that this remains temporary and they can 'upgrade' to some form of mass redactions sooner rather than later.

I'll aim to clarify all of this in the MSC.

# MSC4293: Redact on ban

[MSC2244 (accepted)](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/main/proposals/2244-mass-redactions.md)-style
mass redactions are incredibly helpful for cleaning up large volumes of spam, but still require sending
a dedicated event to clean up the spam. In a typical case, a user will get kicked/banned from a room
and the moderators will further redact some or all of their messages. Mass redactions have more use
cases, but the specific case of "redact everything upon ban" is something which may be easily backported

> to existing room versions.

Reviewer 2: I don't think I'm quite getting this proposal. So it's just a temporary measure to do mass redactions in old room versions? Why not just a separate 'mass redact' endpoint? Or, for that matter, have the HS look for mass redact events sent into old room versions and do them manually exactly as it would do here?

Reviewer: MSC4194 is a prior exploration of a mass redact endpoint for this use case. A reason for collecting the responsibilities into a flag on the ban event are because of the following complications:

- The homeserver applying redactions would also need to send redactions for future soft failed events as well as already received historical events.
  + Toggling this behavior is complicated: should a user rejoin would probably need to be tied to membership in the same way is in this proposal.
- The endpoint will always be used after a room member is banned. There isn't another use case with exception of self redaction which is intentionally being ignored by both proposals.
- Without mass redaction events, federating individual redaction events takes longer than a single ban event which can flag to clients to hide all content associated with a user before redaction events arrive. Which is critical in spam attacks.

Reviewer 2: I'm afraid I may be more confused if anything. I was assuming the HS would do something to make this backwards compatible but now I wonder if I've misunderstood that. What makes this backwards compatible given a mass redaction isn't? If this is not a short-term measure, in what circumstances would this be used vs a mass redaction? In any case, hopefully the edit should make things clearer. The info in the responses here probably needs to go into the MSC.

Author: I believe I've made it clearer in b06afd7d6d3f54a1939d907b4afdd8c2668627f1 what this proposal's purpose is, and the direction it intends to go in. If there's still clarity issues, please open a new thread so I don't miss it 😅

This proposal suggests adding a new flag to membership events to indicate to clients and servers that
all of that user's events should be redacted in addition to being kicked or banned. The flag isn't
protected from redaction itself, so may have some consistency issues, but overall should still provide
relatively high amounts of protection to rooms.

## Proposal

A new flag is added to [`m.room.member`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/client-server-api/#mroommember)
events where the target user is kicked or banned: `redact_events`. This flag is a boolean and, when
`true`, causes servers (and clients) to redact all of the user's events as though they received an
[`m.room.redaction`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/client-server-api/#mroomredaction), including

> adding [`redacted_because`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/client-server-api/#redactions) to `unsigned`

Reviewer 3: The content of `redacted_because` is not clear. It is the corresponding `m.room.member` event, right?

Author: correct. I'll attempt to clarify with an example in the MSC.

In short:

```json
{
  "type": "m.room.message",
  "other": "fields",
  "unsigned": {
    "redacted_because": {
      "type": "m.room.member",
      "other": "fields",
      "content": {
        "membership": "ban",
        "redact_events": true,
        "reason": "spam"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Author: clarified in 244082afac23617e0857df2728e60ef1e4263945

> where applicable. An `m.room.redaction` event is not actually sent, however.

Reviewer 4: Later on in the proposal, it's said several times that sending redactions as fallback support is intended, so I'm getting mixed signals here. When this flag is passed, should the server send *actual* redactions or not? I assume it's "yes, send actual redactions, until greater adoption makes them redundant" from later paragraphs, however it is not clear.

Reviewer: > "yes, send actual redactions, until greater adoption makes them redundant"

If this is the implication then it shouldn't be. Redactions will always need to be sent in legacy room versions. And if the proposal has been written with otherwise then that's a pretty serious issue. @turt2live could you please clarify?

My understanding was that redaction events would have to be sent for all room versions prior to the inclusion of [MSC4298](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4298).

Author: TLDR: "yes, send actual redactions ***if you want to***, until greater adoption makes them redundant" (added emphasis mine) is accurate.

----

Fallback behaviour is a bit of an awkward case for MSCs. In this case, the intended change is meant to be additive to the spec with no actual requirement to send redaction events (even in existing room versions), but there are several implementations of Matrix clients and servers which already exist today that won't know how to handle this new behaviour, and thus senders are *encouraged* (not required) to send "fallback redactions". 

The MSC does give some guidance on what fallback behaviour might look like, but leaves removal of that fallback behaviour up to the individual projects. One project may, for example, decide that pre-MSC4298 rooms will forever get fallback redactions while another decides that 3 months from spec release there is enough client implementations to safely drop the fallback support. Some implementations may also choose somewhere in the middle of that spectrum: instead of chasing events and retrying redactions, it could do a single query and send redactions once, leaving any errors to hopefully be picked up by the redact-on-ban flag.

Neither this MSC or MSC4298 make the fallback behaviour required, either for existing room versions or implementations of Matrix.

Author: I believe this is clarified in 244082afac23617e0857df2728e60ef1e4263945

> where applicable. An `m.room.redaction` event is not actually sent, however.

Reviewer 5: This proposal should be more explicit about clients needing to implement watching for the `redact_events` field and redacting events locally upon seeing it. I could see a client developer walking away from reading this proposal thinking that it will magically work once the homeserver implements support for it.

Author: should be clearer in 244082afac23617e0857df2728e60ef1e4263945

**Note**: This also means that if the user was kicked/banned with a `reason`, that event is automatically
compatible with the redaction `reason` field and shows up accordingly.

Similar to regular redactions, if the sender of the membership event can't actually redact the target's
events, the redaction doesn't apply. This means having a power level higher than or equal to `redacts`
*and* `events["m.room.redaction"]` (if set). We maintain the `events` check despite not actually sending
events of that type to keep the same expectations within rooms. If the sender doesn't have permission

> to redact an event normally, no redaction is applied.

Author: No, self-leaves are not permitted by this MSC. Rationale being it opens a can of worms I'd rather not get this MSC stuck in.

> to redact an event normally, no redaction is applied.

Reviewer 6: Ok, I think that's unclear that the behavior only applies if the sender and state key don't match then.

> to redact an event normally, no redaction is applied.

Author: Clarified in a78f536bb944163dacd29bff5eec6fae4feba4e3

If the sender is allowed to redact, the redaction behaviour continues until the membership event itself

> is redacted (thus removing the field), another membership event removes the field, or the flag is set

Reviewer 6: I feel like this says the opposite?

> until the membership event itself is redacted

> If the sender is allowed to redact, the redaction behaviour continues until the membership event itself
> is redacted (thus removing the field), another membership event removes the field, or the flag is set

Reviewer 6: I've read this a handful of times now and I can't interpret it any other way.

```suggestion
If the sender is allowed to redact, the redaction behaviour continues until a membership event for
that user is reached which does not have the flag set or has the flag set
```

> is redacted (thus removing the field), another membership event removes the field, or the flag is set

Author: I believe this should be clarified in 244082afac23617e0857df2728e60ef1e4263945

cache. Upon clearing or invalidating their cache, they will either receive redacted events if their
server supports the feature or unredacted events otherwise.

To (primarily) help protect users on unsupported *clients*, implementations SHOULD continue to try
sending individual redaction events in addition to the redact-on-ban flag. They MAY cease to do so
once they are comfortable with the level of adoption for this proposal. Servers in particular SHOULD
assist clients and send individual redaction events on their behalf, meaning clients SHOULD wait a
little bit before trying to issue redactions themselves. For example, a client may ban a user, wait
a minute, then start sending redactions if it hasn't seen an `m.room.redaction` event targeting some
of the banned user's events. Servers MAY deduplicate redactions to lower federation load, as they
always could.

**Note**: It is possible due to implementation and real-world constraints that not all individual
redactions will "make it" over federation to another server. This is why mass redaction approaches
are preferred, as they are significantly more reliable.

> ## Potential issues

Author: it should be covered in the potential issues, but I'll aim to clarify in the text. The short version is: yes, it's weird, but not any more weird than usual. A server which requests events from a server that redacted them will receive redacted copies. This infectious behaviour is a feature, though if a server *really* wanted to it could ask other servers until it finds an unredacted copy.

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer 6: I'm worried about the opposite -- receiving unredacted events and not knowing they should be redacted.

If a user is banned using `redact_events: true`, unbanned, rejoins, sends more events, and is banned
again using `redact_events: true`, the user's events between bans will be subsequently redacted. The
events redacted by the first ban may also be re-redacted by servers/clients depending on implementation.
This is considered expected behaviour, and implementations can internally track which events they've
already auto-redacted to avoid duplicate work.

With respect to the fallback behaviour, a client might not know if a server is applying fallback
redactions and may not wish to wait an arbitrary amount of time to see if it does. One solution would
be to have the server expose a [capability](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.15/client-server-api/#capabilities-negotiation),
however such a flag would be longer lived than the fallback behaviour itself (hopefully). Instead,
clients which don't implement watchdog functionality SHOULD send redactions anyway, even if it
duplicates the server's fallback efforts. Further, as already mentioned above, server MAY deduplicate
redactions to lower their federation load, though this is closer to a SHOULD considering clients are

> already sending their own redaction events (like in the case of Mjolnir).

Author: this MSC does apply to existing room versions, and is in use already in the Foundation's public rooms.

> already sending their own redaction events (like in the case of Mjolnir).

Author: The MSC now acknowledges that it's not-great, but continues to recommend it in 244082afac23617e0857df2728e60ef1e4263945

new flag isn't protected from redaction itself and may cause problems, but it does allow moderators
to take an action they were going to anyway: ban & redact everything the user ever sent, without
needing to wait for a new room version to roll out.

By applying the flag to a user ID instead of an event ID (or set of event IDs), the consumer's local
view is considered instead of the sender's: a redaction for "all of `@alice:example.org`'s events"
when applied by a client removes all events visible to that client. Similarly, that redaction applied
by a server to their local database will redact whatever events the server has already seen, or will
see in the future.

Though this MSC isn't breaking for clients in the same way that MSC2244 is, clients (and to a degree,
servers) may not support the MSC right away. This means that senders may still have to send "fallback
redactions" to ensure the room is cleaned up, though those senders can begin to treat those redactions
as best effort (currently, moderation bots in particular work incredibly hard to ensure they get *every*
event redacted, but can run into delivery, reliability, and completeness issues with 1:1 redactions).

> It's also important to note that this proposal intends to compliment mass redactions and coexist in

Reviewer 7: Nitpick:

```suggestion
It's also important to note that this proposal intends to complement mass redactions and coexist in
```

already applied up to that point are *not* undone, though clients/servers which purge the events and
re-fetch them might receive unredacted copies if they originate from a server which didn't apply this
proposal's effects. Future proposals like [MSC4298](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4298)
protect the flag from redaction, avoiding the awkward state where events might be redacted for no
discernible reason after the membership event itself is redacted.

`redact_events` is also added to the [`/kick`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3roomsroomidkick)
and [`/ban`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3roomsroomidban)
endpoints and is proxied to the resulting event just like `reason` is. It is optional on these endpoints.

An example ban event is:

```jsonc
{
  // Irrelevant fields excluded

  "type": "m.room.member",
  "state_key": "@spam:example.org",
  "sender": "@mod:example.org",
  "content": {
    "membership": "ban",
    "reason": "flooding", // this is copied to `redacted_because`, leading to clients showing it
    "redact_events": true
  }
}
```

> An example sccenario would be:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
An example scenario would be:
```

1. Alice joins the room.
2. Alice sends events A, B, and C.
3. Alice leaves the room.
4. For whatever reason, Alice rejoins the room.
5. Alice sends events D, E, and F.
6. Bob bans Alice with `redact_events: true`.
7. Clients and servers apply redactions to events D, E, and F, but *not* A, B, or C. No actual

>    `m.room.redaction` events are sent in this example.

Reviewer 5: What happens if Alice simply sends another `join`?

server supports the feature, or unredacted events otherwise. This is also considered expected behaviour.

Though this proposal makes it clear that `m.room.redaction` events aren't actually sent, senders of
kicks/bans MAY still send actual redactions in addition to `redact_events: true` to ensure that older
clients and servers have the best possible chance of redacting the event. These redactions SHOULD be
considered "best effort" by the sender as they may encounter delivery issues, especially when using
1:1 redactions instead of mass redactions. "Best effort" might mean using endpoints like
[MSC4194](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4194)'s batch redaction, or using
the less reliable `/messages` endpoint to locate target event IDs to redact. Senders SHOULD note that
this fallback behaviour will only target events they can see (or be made to see via MSC4194) and might
not be the same events that a receiving client or server sees.

Senders are encouraged to evaluate when they can cease sending fallback redactions like those described
above to minimize the event traffic involved in a ban. For moderation bots this may mean waiting for

> sufficiently high *client* implementations existing in their communities.

Reviewer: How does a moderation bot provide fallback if the server it is using implements this MSC?

7. If a user is banned without the flag then banned again with the flag, their events sent before the
   first ban won't be redacted. This is already the case with moderation bots which support autoredaction
   when certain ban reasons are used: if there's a typo/problem with the reason, the bot's operator
   may need to issue more commands/requests to reach the intended result.

   Clients and moderation bots are encouraged to implement UX which reduces the chances of this sort
   of thing happening. Moderation teams are also encouraged to develop operating procedures which
   limit the opportunity for accidentally encountering this case.

8. A spammer may attempt to work around this MSC's effects by joining and leaving the room during
   their spam. This has relatively high cost (the impact of spam is lesser when they aren't joined
   to the room, and re-joining will hit a more restrictive rate limit on most servers).

   Moderation bots and similar community safety tools are encouraged to add restrictions to the number
   of join+leave cycles a user may perform in a short window. This will further reduce the effectiveness

>    of such an attack. Issue 7 above also applies here.

Reviewer 5: How does one effectively limit the number of joins a given user can perform? If the spammer is on their own homeserver, then there are no CS API rate limits.

What's to stop a user joining a room, waiting 24hrs to clear any join rate-limits, then spamming and sending another join? Relying on banning a user before they finish spamming and sending a state event seems very hopeful, especially when spam is typically reported via bystanders.

Why not just redact all of a user's event history since the creation of the room?

Reviewer 5: @mscbot concern The proposal doesn't prevent users from spamming and sending an `m.room.member` event to protect the spam event.

Reviewer 8: My client implementation is at least just "if current state says redact_events, hide all events sent by user". I'm assuming that if a spammer is unbanned, the events have either been redacted explicitly or weren't actually spam and can be shown again.
